Comparison of all classfication Models

In terms of accuracy, the random forest model using only the selected features using LASSO regression had the best performance. 
With the exception of using the SVD-reduced data, random forest in fact consistently achieved the largest accuracy. This finding 
is expected, as random forest is known to be a powerful classification model. It leverages the combined predictions of multiple 
decision trees, each built from distinct combinations of independent variables drawn from bootstrap samples. But, it is not 
expected for the SVD-reduced data to result in a more accurate logistic regression and support vector machine model than random 
forest, since baseline models typically do not predict as well as ensemble models. AdaBoost performed the worst in 
terms of accuracy for the SVD-reduced data, which is very surprising because it is an ensemble model, similar to building multiple
logistic regression models. AdaBoost consistently performs the second worst across the full data and the LASSO-reduced data, in 
front of the KNN and classification tree, respectively. KNN performs the second best in terms of accuracy on the LASSO-reduced 
dataset, which makes sense because it is known that KNN requires good variable selection for a good performance. 

Furthermore, in terms of precision, all models did quite well except for the classification tree. The classification tree was the 
only model that performed with a precision of much less than 0.8 across the versions of the data used. AdaBoost consistently 
achieved the greatest precision across all versions of the data and therefore the largest true positive rate. Surprisingly, 
random forest performed among the worst in terms of precision, except for the version of the data that contained all features. 
SVM, KNN, and logistic regression all had a true positive rate of greater than 0.8. And thus overall, the classification models 
did quite well in terms of precision.

Also, in terms of recall, random forest performed the best on the LASSO-reduced and the full data. Logistic regression performed 
the best in terms of recall on the SVD-reduced data. This is likely because of the probabilistic nature of logistic regression, 
since SVD relies on conserving the largest amount of variance possible within the data. AdaBoost performed the worst in terms of 
recall on the SVD-reduced data. After its poor performance in terms of accuracy and great performance in terms of precision, this 
is not a very surprising finding. For the full data, the KNN model performed the worst in terms of recall, which is not too 
surprising because as noted before, KNN requires good variable selection. Lastly, the classification tree performed the worst in 
terms of recall on the SVD-reduced data, another unsurprising finding due to being an overly simplistic type of model, exhibiting 
a large variance.

Lastly, in terms of the F1 score, the random forest model performed the best on both the full and LASSO-reduced data. Since the 
F1 the harmonic average of precision and recall, this is expected. For the SVD-reduced data, the logistic regression model 
performed the best, again, an expected trend since it had the best recall and close to the best precision. The classification 
tree performs the worst across all versions of the data in terms of F1 score.

Overall, using a lower number of features creates a more simplistic model and reduces variance, which helps balance out the 
bias-variance trade-off. Balancing out the bias-variance trade-off is essential in minimizing error. And thus the random forest 
model performs the best on the test data. Conversely, the classification tree performs the worst on the test data (since LASSO 
reduces the number of features in the data the most).

All of the classification models' hyperparameters were optimized using 5-fold cross validation using scikit-learn's model_selection 
module in Python. For all of the ensemble classification models, the scikit-learn library's ensemble module was used for fitting 
and testing. All classfication models used the scikit-learn library in Python for fitting and testing. Logistic regression was 
fit and tested the linear_model module, SVM with the SVC function, KNN with the neighbors module, and classification tree with 
the tree module in Python.

Conclusion

In summary, online learning has increased significantly compared to traditional in-person education, especially following the 
global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the online environment, there has been a significant increase in the dropout rate 
(He et al., 2020). Accurately making predictions on whether a student will dropout is the aim of this project, and all factors 
that impact this prediction have been investigated. t-SNE was used to properly visualize a 2-dimensional representation of the 
data, and singular value decomposition and LASSO regression were performed for variable selection. Additionally, LASSO regression 
was performed to determine the most important factors that contribute to dropout rate.

It was found that the random forest ensemble model had the overall best performance. Accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score 
were used to determine which classification model performed the best. Random forest performed the best on the reduced data using 
LASSO regression. LASSO regression chose the most relevant features within the data. None of which consisted of metrics involving 
a student’s parents. It was made clear that the most important metrics used to predict the outcome was academic performance and 
other academic-related metrics. In particular, the following features played the most prominent role in predicting whether a
given student dropped out, is enrolled in classes, or has graduated: the number of curricular credits enrolled and credited in the 
second semester, whether their tuition fees are up to date, whether the student is a scholarship holder, and the number of 
curricular credits approved in the first semester.

References

He, Y., Chen, R., Li, X., Hao, C., Liu, S., Zhang, G., and Jiang, B. (2020). Online at-risk student identification using 
rnn-gru joint neural networks. Information, 11(10)
